README.md, before:

qxsl: Amateur-Radio Logging Library & LISP
====

![image](https://img.shields.io/badge/Gradle-6-red.svg)
![image](https://img.shields.io/badge/OpenJDK-SE11-red.svg)
![image](https://img.shields.io/badge/GraalVM-20.0-red.svg)
![image](https://img.shields.io/badge/JRuby-9.2-orange.svg)
![image](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-LGPL3-darkblue.svg)

qxsl is a Java library for processing amateur-radio log files, including scoring and tabulation frameworks for ham radio contests, which are important components of [Automatic Acceptance & Tabulation System (ATS)](https://github.com/nextzlog/ats4) for [the ALLJA1 contest](http://ja1zlo.u-tokyo.org/allja1).

## Features

- provides log en/decoders for QXML, [ADIF](http://adif.org), [Cabrillo](https://wwrof.org/cabrillo/), [zLog](http://www.zlog.org), [CTESTWIN](http://e.gmobb.jp/ctestwin/Download.html), etc.
- provides tabulation & scoring frameworks for amateur-radio contests and awards.
- provides the rulekit framework which allows you to write contest rules in Ruby or LISP.

## Documents

- [Javadoc](https://nextzlog.github.io/qxsl/doc/index.html)
- [コンテスト運営を支援する自動集計システム (PDF)](https://pafelog.net/ats4.pdf)

## Sample Codes

Because we are [Scalalians](https://www.scala-lang.org/), please be patient to read Scala codes!

### Document Model

The package `qxsl.model` defines the structure of log files, where each communication is handled as an `Item` object, while the entire log is represented as `List[Item]`.
Each `Item` contains some `Field` objects, which indicate properties such as `Time`, `Mode` and `Band`.
In addition, each `Item` holds two `Exch` objects, namely `Rcvd` and `Sent`, which involve some messages (`Field`s) exchanged by the operator and the contacted station.

```Scala
import qxsl.model.{Item,Rcvd,Sent}
val item: Item = new Item
val rcvd: Rcvd = item.getRcvd
val sent: Sent = item.getSent
```

### Field Management

The package `qxsl.field` provides a management framework for `Field` implementations.
The class `FieldManager` detects `FieldFactory` implementations [from the class path automatically](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/util/ServiceLoader.html), and each `FieldFactory` provides en/decoders for individual `Field` implementation.

```Scala
val fields = new qxsl.field.FieldManager()
item.add(fields.cache(new QName("qxsl.org", "mode")).field("CW"))
item.add(fields.cache(new QName("adif.org", "MODE")).field("CW"))
val mode = item.get(new QName("qxsl.org", "mode")).value()
```

This mechanism is utilized for en/decoding the *QXML* format, which is an alternative log format proposed by the qxsl development team.
*QXML* is extensible, and supports namespaces which have been prohibited in the traditional ADIF:

```XML:sample.qxml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<list xmlns:qxsl="qxsl.org">
  <item qxsl:time="2017-06-03T16:17:00Z" qxsl:call="QV1DOK" qxsl:band="14000" qxsl:mode="CW">
    <rcvd qxsl:rstq="599" qxsl:code="120103"/>
    <sent qxsl:rstq="599" qxsl:code="100110"/>
  </item>
  <item qxsl:time="2017-06-04T00:01:00Z" qxsl:call="QD1QXB" qxsl:band="21000" qxsl:mode="CW">
    <rcvd qxsl:rstq="599" qxsl:code="110117"/>
    <sent qxsl:rstq="599" qxsl:code="100110"/>
  </item>
</list>
```

### Decoding & Encoding

The package `qxsl.table` provides a basic framework for en/decoding log files including QXML and ADIF.
The class `TableManager` detects individual formats (`TableFactory`s) from the class path automatically, and also provides the `detect` method for automatic format detection.

```Scala
val tables = new qxsl.table.TableManager()
val table: List[Item] = tables.decode(Files.readAllBytes(path))
tables.forName("qxml").encoder(Files.newOutputStream(path)).encode(table)
```

The package `qxsl.sheet` provides an en/decoding framework similar to the `qxsl.table` package, except that `qxsl.sheet` handles contest summary sheets such as Cabrillo and [JARL summary sheet](https://www.jarl.org/Japanese/1_Tanoshimo/1-1_Contest/e-log.htm) R2.0.
The class `SheetManager` manages individual `SheetFactory` implementations, and also provides the `unpack` method useful for extracting table items from a summary sheet.

```Scala
val sheets = new qxsl.sheet.SheetManager()
val table: List[Item] = tables.decode(sheets.unpack(Files.readAllBytes(path)))
```

### Scoring for Awards & Contests

The package `qxsl.ruler` provides a rulemaking framework for amateur radio awards and contests.
Each contest is represented as a `Contest` object, which is provided by a `RuleKit` object or a script engine to define the contest.

```Scala
import qxsl.ruler.{Contest,RuleKit}
val engine = RuleKit.load("elva")
val stream = engine.getClass().getResourceAsStream("allja1.lisp")
val allja1 = engine.contest(new InputStreamReader(stream, UTF_8))
```

Each contest involves multiple `Section` objects.
The `Section` object accepts `List[Item]` and validates the communications one by one, by invoking the `summarize` method.

```Scala
import qxsl.ruler.{Section,Summary}
for(section: Section <- allja1.getSections().asScala) {
  val summary: Summary = section.summarize(table)
  println(section.getCode())
  println(section.getName())
  summary.accepted.asScala.foreach(println)
  summary.rejected.asScala.foreach(println)
  println(summary.score())
  println(summary.total())
}
```

Currently, the `RuleKit` class supports two domain specific languages, namely Ruby (JRuby) and [Elva Lisp](https://github.com/nextzlog/qxsl/blob/master/ELVA.md).
Elva Lisp is a special LISP for the purpose of contest definition.

### Bundled Contest Definitions

The following LISP programs are bundled inside the JAR file, as sample codes in Elva Lisp.

- [`allja1.lisp`](https://github.com/nextzlog/qxsl/tree/master/src/main/resources/qxsl/ruler/allja1.lisp)
- [`format.lisp`](https://github.com/nextzlog/qxsl/tree/master/src/main/resources/qxsl/ruler/format.lisp)
- [`jautil.lisp`](https://github.com/nextzlog/qxsl/tree/master/src/main/resources/qxsl/ruler/jautil.lisp)

## Supported Formats

### TableFactory

| name | format | ext  |
|------|--------|------|
|`qxml`|QXML    |      |
|`jarl`|JARL    |      |
|`adis`|ADIF    |`.adi`|
|`adxs`|ADIF    |`.adx`|
|`cqww`|CQWW    |`.cbr`|
|`zbin`|zLog    |`.zlo`|
|`zdos`|zLog    |`.txt`|
|`zall`|zLog    |`.all`|
|`cbin`|CTESTWIN|`.lg8`|
|`ctxt`|CTESTWIN|`.txt`|

### SheetFactory

| name | format  |
|------|---------|
|`jarl`|JARL R2.0|
|`cab3`|Cabrillo3|

## Maven

If you want to use the latest build, configure the `build.gradle` as follows:

```Groovy:build.gradle
repositories.maven {
  url('https://nextzlog.github.io/qxsl/mvn/')
}

dependencies {
  implementation('qxsl:qxsl:+')
}
```

## Build

[Gradle](https://gradle.org/) retrieves dependent libraries, runs tests, and generates a JAR file automatically.

```shell
$ gradle build javadoc publish
```

You can create a native library instead of a JAR file.
[GraalVM](https://www.graalvm.org) must be installed before compilation.
Then run the command manually as follows:

```shell
$ native-image -cp build/libs/qxsl.jar
```

You can download the latest [`qxsl.dll`](https://github.com/nextzlog/qxsl/releases/download/nightly/qxsl.dll) created by GitHub Actions.

## Contribution

Feel free to contact [@nextzlog](https://twitter.com/nextzlog) on Twitter.

## License

### Author

[無線部開発班](https://pafelog.net)

### Clauses

- This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License(LGPL) as published by the Free Software Foundation (FSF), either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.

- This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but **without any warranty**; without even the implied warranty of **merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose**.
See the GNU Lesser General Public License for more details.

- You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License and GNU Lesser General Public License along with this program.
If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

Commit message:

qxsl.{draft.Mul{1,2}, model.Item.some, ruler.{Counter,Service}}

README.md, after:

qxsl: Amateur-Radio Logging Library & LISP
====

![image](https://img.shields.io/badge/Gradle-6-red.svg)
![image](https://img.shields.io/badge/OpenJDK-SE11-red.svg)
![image](https://img.shields.io/badge/GraalVM-20.0-red.svg)
![image](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-LGPL3-darkblue.svg)

qxsl is a Java library for processing amateur-radio log files, including scoring and tabulation frameworks for ham radio contests.

## Features

- provides log en/decoders for QXML, [ADIF](http://adif.org), [Cabrillo](https://wwrof.org/cabrillo/), [zLog](http://www.zlog.org), [CTESTWIN](http://e.gmobb.jp/ctestwin/Download.html), etc.
- provides tabulation & scoring frameworks for amateur-radio contests and awards.
- provides the rulekit framework which allows you to write contest rules in Ruby, Python, and LISP.

## Documents

- [Javadoc](https://nextzlog.github.io/qxsl/doc/index.html)
- [コンテスト運営を支援する自動集計システム (PDF)](https://pafelog.net/ats4.pdf)

## Applications

- [zLog+ ZyLO](https://github.com/nextzlog/zylo).
- [Automatic Acceptance & Tabulation System (ATS)](https://github.com/nextzlog/ats4) for [the ALLJA1 contest](http://ja1zlo.u-tokyo.org/allja1).

## Sample Codes

Because we are [Scalalians](https://www.scala-lang.org/), please be patient to read Scala codes!

### Document Model

The package `qxsl.model` defines the structure of log files, where each communication is handled as an `Item` object, while the entire log is represented as `List[Item]`.
Each `Item` contains some `Field` objects, which indicate properties such as `Time`, `Mode` and `Band`.
In addition, each `Item` holds two `Exch` objects, namely `Rcvd` and `Sent`, which involve some messages (`Field`s) exchanged by the operator and the contacted station.

```Scala
import qxsl.model.{Item,Rcvd,Sent}
val item: Item = new Item
val rcvd: Rcvd = item.getRcvd
val sent: Sent = item.getSent
```

### Field Management

The package `qxsl.field` provides a management framework for `Field` implementations.
The class `FieldManager` detects `FieldFactory` implementations [from the class path automatically](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/util/ServiceLoader.html), and each `FieldFactory` provides en/decoders for individual `Field` implementation.

```Scala
val fields = new qxsl.field.FieldManager()
item.add(fields.cache(new QName("qxsl.org", "mode")).field("CW"))
item.add(fields.cache(new QName("adif.org", "MODE")).field("CW"))
val mode = item.get(new QName("qxsl.org", "mode")).value()
```

This mechanism is utilized for en/decoding the *QXML* format, which is an alternative log format proposed by the qxsl development team.
*QXML* is extensible, and supports namespaces which have been prohibited in the traditional ADIF:

```XML:sample.qxml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<list xmlns:qxsl="qxsl.org">
  <item qxsl:time="2017-06-03T16:17:00Z" qxsl:call="QV1DOK" qxsl:band="14000" qxsl:mode="CW">
    <rcvd qxsl:rstq="599" qxsl:code="120103"/>
    <sent qxsl:rstq="599" qxsl:code="100110"/>
  </item>
  <item qxsl:time="2017-06-04T00:01:00Z" qxsl:call="QD1QXB" qxsl:band="21000" qxsl:mode="CW">
    <rcvd qxsl:rstq="599" qxsl:code="110117"/>
    <sent qxsl:rstq="599" qxsl:code="100110"/>
  </item>
</list>
```

### Decoding & Encoding

The package `qxsl.table` provides a basic framework for en/decoding log files including QXML and ADIF.
The class `TableManager` detects individual formats (`TableFactory`s) from the class path automatically, and also provides the `detect` method for automatic format detection.

```Scala
val tables = new qxsl.table.TableManager()
val table: List[Item] = tables.decode(Files.readAllBytes(path))
tables.getFactory("qxml").encoder(Files.newOutputStream(path)).encode(table)
```

The package `qxsl.sheet` provides an en/decoding framework similar to the `qxsl.table` package, except that `qxsl.sheet` handles contest summary sheets such as Cabrillo and [JARL summary sheet](https://www.jarl.org/Japanese/1_Tanoshimo/1-1_Contest/e-log.htm) R2.0.
The class `SheetManager` manages individual `SheetFactory` implementations, and also provides the `unpack` method useful for extracting table items from a summary sheet.

```Scala
val sheets = new qxsl.sheet.SheetManager()
val table: List[Item] = tables.decode(sheets.unpack(Files.readAllBytes(path)))
```

### Scoring for Awards & Contests

The package `qxsl.ruler` provides a rulemaking framework for amateur radio awards and contests.
Each contest is represented as a `Contest` object, which is provided by a `RuleKit` object or a script engine to define the contest.

```Scala
import qxsl.ruler.{Contest,RuleKit}
val engine = RuleKit.forName("elva")
val stream = engine.getClass().getResourceAsStream("allja1.lisp")
val allja1 = engine.contest(new InputStreamReader(stream, UTF_8))
```

Each contest involves multiple `Section` objects.
The `Section` object accepts `List[Item]` and validates the communications one by one, by invoking the `summarize` method.

```Scala
import qxsl.ruler.{Section,Summary}
for(section: Section <- allja1.getSections().asScala) {
  val summary: Summary = section.summarize(table)
  println(section.getCode())
  println(section.getName())
  summary.accepted.asScala.foreach(println)
  summary.rejected.asScala.foreach(println)
  println(summary.score())
  println(summary.total())
}
```

Currently, the `RuleKit` class supports some domain specific languages, including Ruby, Python, and [Elva Lisp](https://github.com/nextzlog/qxsl/blob/master/ELVA.md).
Elva Lisp is a special LISP for the purpose of contest definition.

### Bundled Contest Definitions

The following LISP programs are bundled inside the JAR file, as sample codes in Elva Lisp.

- [`allja1.lisp`](https://github.com/nextzlog/qxsl/tree/master/src/main/resources/qxsl/ruler/allja1.lisp)
- [`format.lisp`](https://github.com/nextzlog/qxsl/tree/master/src/main/resources/qxsl/ruler/format.lisp)
- [`jautil.lisp`](https://github.com/nextzlog/qxsl/tree/master/src/main/resources/qxsl/ruler/jautil.lisp)

## Supported Formats

### TableFactory

| name | format | ext  |
|------|--------|------|
|`qxml`|QXML    |      |
|`jarl`|JARL    |      |
|`adis`|ADIF    |`.adi`|
|`adxs`|ADIF    |`.adx`|
|`cqww`|CQWW    |`.cbr`|
|`zbin`|zLog    |`.zlo`|
|`zdos`|zLog    |`.txt`|
|`zall`|zLog    |`.all`|
|`cbin`|CTESTWIN|`.lg8`|
|`ctxt`|CTESTWIN|`.txt`|

### SheetFactory

| name | format  |
|------|---------|
|`jarl`|JARL R2.0|
|`cab3`|Cabrillo3|

## Maven

If you want to use the latest build, configure the `build.gradle` as follows:

```Groovy:build.gradle
repositories.maven {
  url('https://nextzlog.github.io/qxsl/mvn/')
}

dependencies {
  implementation('qxsl:qxsl:+')
}
```

## Build

[Gradle](https://gradle.org/) retrieves dependent libraries, runs tests, and generates a JAR file automatically.

```shell
$ gradle build javadoc publish
```

You can create a native library instead of a JAR file.
[GraalVM](https://www.graalvm.org) must be installed before compilation.
Then run the command manually as follows:

```shell
$ native-image -cp build/libs/qxsl.jar
```

You can download the latest [`qxsl.dll`](https://github.com/nextzlog/qxsl/releases/download/nightly/qxsl.dll) created by GitHub Actions.

## Contribution

Feel free to contact [@nextzlog](https://twitter.com/nextzlog) on Twitter.

## License

### Author

[無線部開発班](https://pafelog.net)

### Clauses

- This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License(LGPL) as published by the Free Software Foundation (FSF), either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.

- This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but **without any warranty**; without even the implied warranty of **merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose**.
See the GNU Lesser General Public License for more details.

- You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License and GNU Lesser General Public License along with this program.
If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
